..
   # *******************************************************************************
   # Copyright (c) 2026 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
   #
   # See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
   # information regarding copyright ownership.
   #
   # This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
   # terms of the Apache License Version 2.0 which is available at
   # https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   #
   # SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
   # *******************************************************************************

Build Dashboards and Quality Gates
==================================

Use this guide in repositories that consume docs-as-code as a Bazel
dependency.

Goals:

1. Publish traceability dashboards from repository needs.
2. Export machine-readable metrics.
3. Enforce CI thresholds with ``traceability_gate``.

What You Get
------------

With the ``docs(...)`` macro and ``score_metamodel`` extension enabled, your
repository can:

- build an HTML dashboard from its own Sphinx needs,
- include external needs from other repositories when desired,
- export ``needs.json`` and ``metrics.json`` for machine-readable reporting,
- gate CI on traceability thresholds via ``traceability_gate``.

Typical Setup
-------------

For details, see :ref:`setup`.

Configuration
-------------

Default Behavior (No Configuration Needed)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, ``score_metamodel`` autodiscovers requirement types from the
repository needs present in the current build. Requirement types are identified
from ``needs_types`` entries tagged with ``requirement`` or
``requirement_excl_process``.

This is the recommended setup for most repositories.

Optional Override for Requirement Types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a repository needs to force a specific set of requirement types, set an
explicit override in ``docs/conf.py``:

.. code-block:: python

   score_metamodel_requirement_types = "feat_req,comp_req,aou_req"

When this setting is provided, the explicit list is used instead of
autodiscovery.

Use ``score_metamodel_include_external_needs = True`` only in repositories that
intentionally aggregate requirements across module dependencies, such as
integration repositories.

Building the Dashboard
----------------------

After building/running any docs command (i.e. ``bazel build //:needs_json`` or ``bazel run //:docs_check`` are the fastest):

The documentation build writes ``metrics.json`` via ``score_metamodel``, and the ``needs_json`` artifact contains:

- ``bazel-bin/needs_json/_build/needs/needs.json``
- ``bazel-bin/needs_json/_build/needs/metrics.json``

The dashboard charts and the CI gate both use the same computed metrics.

Inputs for Linkage Metrics
--------------------------

To get meaningful dashboard and gate values, consumer repositories typically
need three inputs:

1. Requirement and architecture needs in the documentation itself.
2. Source code references via :doc:`source_to_doc_links`.
3. Test metadata via :doc:`test_to_doc_links`.

If one of those inputs is missing, the related chart or gate metric will remain
empty or low.

Choosing Local vs Aggregated Views
----------------------------------

There are two common modes:

**Module repository**

- No setting needed. Local-only scope is the default.
- Gate only on the needs owned by the repository itself.
- Use this for per-module implementation progress and traceability.

**Integration repository**

- Set ``score_metamodel_include_external_needs = True``.
- Aggregate requirements across module dependencies when that is the intended
  repository purpose.
- Use this for system or integration-level dashboards.

CI Quality Gate
---------------

Any docs build (``bazel run //:docs``, ``bazel run //:docs_check``, etc.)
writes ``metrics.json`` alongside the build output. Run the gate on the
exported metrics:

.. code-block:: bash

   bazel run //:docs && \
   bazel run //:traceability_gate -- \
      --metrics-json bazel-bin/needs_json/_build/needs/metrics.json \
      --min-req-code 70 \
      --min-req-test 70 \
      --min-req-fully-linked 60 \
      --min-tests-linked 70

In CI, wire targets through Bazel dependencies so test execution and
docs generation happen before the gate target.

In larger repositories, define a dedicated wrapper target for your standard
gate thresholds so CI calls a single Bazel target.

Useful flags:

- ``--require-all-links`` for strict 100 percent gating

Recommended Rollout
-------------------

For a new consumer repository:

1. Start with local-only metrics.
2. Enable ``scan_code`` and verify ``source_code_link`` coverage first.
3. Add test metadata and verify ``testlink`` coverage.
4. Introduce modest thresholds in CI.
5. Raise thresholds over time as the repository matures.

..
 ╓                                                           ╖
 ║ .. The Following part has been generated by Copilot       ║
 ╙                                                           ╜

Metrics Needpie functions
=========================

Overview
--------

These helpers read values from a nested dictionary named ``CALCULATED_METRICS``.
A metric is selected by a **colon-separated path**, for example:

- ``overall_metrics:total``
- ``overall_metrics:with_test_link``
- ``types:bug:total``

All resolved values are converted to ``int`` and appended to a mutable
``results`` list passed by the caller.

The ``needs`` parameter is accepted for integration compatibility, but it is not
used by the current implementations.

Path format
-----------

Paths are split using ``:`` and then resolved step by step.

Example:

.. code-block:: text

   path = "overall_metrics:total"

is resolved like:

.. code-block:: python

   current = CALCULATED_METRICS
   current = current["overall_metrics"]
   current = current["total"]

Function reference
------------------

_get_key_values(results, argument_paths)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Purpose
^^^^^^^

Internal helper that appends metric values for a list of paths.

Behavior
^^^^^^^^

1. Iterate over each item in ``argument_paths``.
2. Strip whitespace.
3. Skip empty paths.
4. Resolve the path inside ``CALCULATED_METRICS``.
5. Convert to integer and append to ``results``.

Notes
^^^^^

- Modifies ``results`` in place.
- Does not return a new list.
- Raises ``KeyError`` if a path key does not exist.
- Raises ``ValueError`` if a resolved value cannot be converted to ``int``.

get_metrics_with_overall_total_considered(...)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Purpose
^^^^^^^

Compute a remainder against global overall total.

Behavior
^^^^^^^^

1. Append ``CALCULATED_METRICS["overall_metrics"]["total"]`` as first value.
2. Append each metric referenced by ``kwargs.values()``.
3. Replace the first value with:

   ``overall_total - sum(all other appended values)``

Typical use case
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use this when your pie/chart needs an "Other" bucket based on the global total.

Example
^^^^^^^

Assume:

.. code-block:: python

   CALCULATED_METRICS = {
       "overall_metrics": {
           "total": 100,
           "with_test_link": 30,
           "with_review": 20,
       }
   }

Call:

.. code-block:: python

   results = []
   get_metrics_with_overall_total_considered(
       needs=[],
       results=results,
       a="overall_metrics:with_test_link",
       b="overall_metrics:with_review",
   )

Result:

.. code-block:: python

   # Step 1 append total: [100]
   # Step 2 append selected: [100, 30, 20]
   # Step 3 remainder:       [50, 30, 20]
   results == [50, 30, 20]

get_metrics_with_custom_type_total_considered(...)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Purpose
^^^^^^^

Support custom total path if provided as the last kwarg value.

Behavior
^^^^^^^^

If the **last** provided path ends with ``:total``:

1. Append that last path as baseline total.
2. Append all preceding paths as components.
3. Replace the first value with:

   ``baseline_total - sum(components)``

Otherwise:

- Append all provided paths directly (no subtraction).

Important ordering rule
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The special total path must be the **last** kwarg value, for example:

.. code-block:: python

   get_metrics_with_custom_type_total_considered(
       needs=[],
       results=results,
       part_a="types:feature:done",
       part_b="types:feature:in_progress",
       total="types:feature:total",  # must be last
   )

Example with custom total
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Assume:

.. code-block:: python

   CALCULATED_METRICS = {
       "types": {
           "feature": {
               "total": 40,
               "done": 10,
               "in_progress": 5,
           }
       }
   }

Call:

.. code-block:: python

   results = []
   get_metrics_with_custom_type_total_considered(
       needs=[],
       results=results,
       done="types:feature:done",
       in_progress="types:feature:in_progress",
       total="types:feature:total",
   )

Result:

.. code-block:: python

   # baseline total: 40
   # components: 10, 5
   # remainder: 40 - (10 + 5) = 25
   results == [25, 10, 5]

Example without custom total
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Call:

.. code-block:: python

   results = []
   get_metrics_with_custom_type_total_considered(
       needs=[],
       results=results,
       done="types:feature:done",
       in_progress="types:feature:in_progress",
   )

Result:

.. code-block:: python

   # no subtraction mode
   results == [10, 5]

get_just_metrics(...)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Purpose
^^^^^^^

Append only the selected metric values.

Behavior
^^^^^^^^

- Interprets each kwarg value as a path.
- Resolves and appends each value.
- No total baseline and no remainder calculation.

Example
^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: python

   results = []
   get_just_metrics(
       needs=[],
       results=results,
       a="overall_metrics:with_test_link",
       b="overall_metrics:with_review",
   )
   # results might become [30, 20]

How to use these functions correctly
------------------------------------

1. Pass a mutable list in ``results`` (usually ``[]`` initially).
2. Provide metric paths through keyword argument values.
3. Use colon-separated keys (``a:b:c``), not dot notation.
4. For custom-total mode, ensure the total path is the last kwarg value.
5. Expect in-place mutation of ``results``.

Common pitfalls
---------------

- Empty kwargs in custom-total function can lead to index errors
  (because ``values[-1]`` is accessed).
- Invalid paths raise ``KeyError``.
- Non-integer values raise ``ValueError`` during ``int(...)`` conversion.
- ``print(results)`` currently causes side effects during execution; remove if
  quiet behavior is preferred in production.

Testing recommendations
-----------------------

Add unit tests for:

- Basic path resolution with one and multiple paths.
- Whitespace and empty-path handling.
- Overall total remainder logic.
- Custom total behavior when last path ends with ``:total``.
- Behavior when no custom total is provided.
- Error handling for missing keys and non-integer values.
- Empty ``kwargs`` behavior in custom-total function.


Related Guides
--------------

- :ref:`setup`
- :doc:`other_modules`
- :doc:`source_to_doc_links`
- :doc:`test_to_doc_links`
